---
course_id: 6-s897-machine-learning-for-healthcare-spring-2019
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: d85bdff15f958ff33b789712195880fb
    name: Lecture Videos
    weight: 60
title: Lecture Videos
type: course
uid: d85bdff15f958ff33b789712195880fb

---

Due to technical difficulties with the original video, lecture 15 is from the spring 2020 version of the course.{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-1-what-makes-healthcare-unique" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 1: What Makes Healthcare Unique?" description="Prof. Sontag gives an overview of the problem of healthcare in the US. He gives an overview of the history of artificial intelligence in healthcare, reasons why to apply machine learning to healthcare today, and some examples of applied machine learning. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 1: Introduction: What Makes Healthcare Unique? slides (PDF - 2.8MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/vof7x8r_ZUA/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-2-overview-of-clinical-care" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 2: Overview of Clinical Care" description="Prof. Szolovits gives an overview of clinical care from the past to the present. The main topics covered are the goals of medicine, the tasks of medicine, public health, and paying for health care. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 2: Overview of Clinical Care slides (PDF - 3.9MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/DS97JV_o0Fs/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-3-deep-dive-into-clinical-data" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 3: Deep Dive Into Clinical Data" description="Prof. Szolovits gives a deep dive into clinical data, the types of data, and how the data can be standardized. MIMIC-III data is used to illustrate these points. He discusses the difficulties of medicine harmonization and interoperability. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 3: Deep Dive into Clinical Data slides (PDF - 2.1MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/0UFwGJe6ubg/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-4-risk-stratification-part-1" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 4: Risk Stratification, Part 1" description="Prof. Sontag discusses risk stratification and works through a case study of early detection of type 2 diabetes. The second portion of the class is an interview with Leonard D’Avolio, Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical School and founder of Cyft. Speakers: David Sontag, Leonard DAvolio Lecture 4: Risk Stratification, Part 1 slides (PDF - 1.2MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/_shuV1tJbTU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-5-risk-stratification-part-2" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 5: Risk Stratification, Part 2" description="Prof. Sontag continues with the topic of risk stratification. He discusses the derivation of labels for data, evaluation of model performance, and the subtleties with machine learning-based risk stratification. The lecture finishes with survival modeling. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 5: Risk Stratification, Part 2 slides (PDF - 2.2MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/wqI_z1yumzY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-6-physiological-time-series" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 6: Physiological Time-Series" description="Prof. Sontag gives a recap of risk stratification and then explains physiological time-series. Two scenarios are examined: monitoring babies in neonatal ICUs and detecting atrial fibrillation. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 6: Physiological Time-Series slides (PDF - 1.5MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/lLhfDSOwWtU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-7-natural-language-processing-nlp-part-1" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 7: Natural Language Processing (NLP), Part 1" description="This lecture and the next cover the role of natural language processing in machine learning in healthcare. In this lecture, Prof. Szolovits covers methods which are not based on neural networks representations. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 7: Natural Language Processing (NLP), Part 1 slides (PDF - 1.3MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/IiD3YZkkCmE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-8-natural-language-processing-nlp-part-2" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 8: Natural Language Processing (NLP), Part 2" description="Prof. Szolovits covers Natural Language Processing methods including those which are not based on neural networks representations and those techniques which employ neural network architectures. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 8: Natural Language Processing (NLP), Part 2 slides (PDF - 2.0MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/lkO2ocJBsmI/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-9-translating-technology-into-the-clinic" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 9: Translating Technology Into the Clinic" description="Prof. Szolovits discusses the hype cycle as well as two examples of machine learning: Watson for Oncology and Computerized Physician Order Entry. Guest speaker Adam Wright speaks about the development of a medication-related decision support system. Speakers: Peter Szolovits, Adam Wright Lecture 9: Translating Technology into the Clinic slides (PDF)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/ZQu2B3GyI_k/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-10-application-of-machine-learning-to-cardiac-imaging" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 10: Application of Machine Learning to Cardiac Imaging" description="Guest lecturer Rahul Deo, the lead investigator of the One Brave Idea project at Brigham and Womens Hospital, talks about how machine learning techniques are being used and can be used further to augment cardiac imaging. Speaker: Rahul Deo Lecture 10: Machine Learning for Cardiology slides (PDF - 5.3MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/MoEaRpLNo9A/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-11-differential-diagnosis" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 11: Differential Diagnosis" description="Prof. Szolovits explains differential diagnosis, the distinguishing of a condition from others with similar features. He covers models of diagnostic reasoning: flow charts, card selection, naive Bayes, bipartite graphs, QMR DT, and reinforcement learning. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 11: Machine Learning for Differential Diagnosis slides (PDF - 1.8MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/VuKOW8d4KHw/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-12-machine-learning-for-pathology" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 12: Machine Learning for Pathology" description="Dr. Beck begins with a short background of pathology and his work at PathAI. He then discusses computational pathology, building image processing models, and precision immunotherapy. Speaker: Andy Beck Lecture 12: Machine Learning for Pathology slides (PDF - 6.5MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/PKCMH5KOcxQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-13-machine-learning-for-mammography" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 13: Machine Learning for Mammography" description="Dr. Yala discusses deep learning models for mammogram interpretation and triaging. While many aspects of cancer detection based on mammograms are similar to those of natural image classification (ImageNet), there are some key differences. Speaker: Adam Yala Lecture 13: Machine Learning for Mammography slides (PDF - 2.5MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/2ZXYM1h9pgY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-14-causal-inference-part-1" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 14: Causal Inference, Part 1" description="Prof. Sontag discusses causal inference, examples of causal questions, and how these guide treatment decisions. He explains the Rubin-Neyman causal model as a potential outcome framework. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 14: Causal Inference, Part 1 slides (PDF - 2.2MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/gRkUhg9Wb-I/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-15-causal-inference-part-2" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 15: Causal Inference, Part 2" description="This is the 2020 version of the lecture delivered via Zoom, due to technical difficulties in the original lecture 15 video. Prof. Sontag discusses a causal inference setting from a causal graphs perspective. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 15: Causal Inference, Part 2 slides (PDF)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/g5v-NvNoJQQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-16-reinforcement-learning-part-1" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 16: Reinforcement Learning, Part 1" description="Dr. Johansson covers an overview of treatment policies and potential outcomes, an introduction to reinforcement learning, decision processes, reinforcement learning paradigms, and learning from off-policy data. Speaker: Fredrik D. Johansson Lecture 16: Reinforcement Learning slides (PDF)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/YZ5pOgY5hEE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-17-reinforcement-learning-part-2" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 17: Reinforcement Learning, Part 2" description="In the first half, Prof. Sontag discusses how to evaluate different policies in causal inference and how it is related to reinforcement learning. In the second half, Dr. Barbra Dickerman talks about evaluating dynamic treatment strategies. Speakers: David Sontag, Barbra Dickerman Lecture 17: Evaluating Dynamic Treatment Strategies slides (PDF)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/zdotUAxiPGM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-18-disease-progression-modeling-and-subtyping-part-1" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 18: Disease Progression Modeling and Subtyping, Part 1" description="Prof. Sontag discusses aspects of disease progression modeling, including staging, subtyping, and multi-task and unsupervised learning. The goals are to determine the patient’s place in the disease trajectory and how treatment may affect progression. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 18: Disease Progression & Subtyping, Part 1 slides (PDF - 1.6MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/yYWyLZrdRRI/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-19-disease-progression-modeling-and-subtyping-part-2" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 19: Disease Progression Modeling and Subtyping, Part 2" description="Prof. Sontag begins with a recap of the goal of disease progression modeling and then discusses staging from cross-sectional data and simultaneous staging and subtyping. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 19: Disease Progression & Subtyping, Part 2 slides (PDF - 3.2MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/aJqgO8e37_g/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-20-precision-medicine" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 20: Precision Medicine" description="Prof. Szolovits gives an introduction to disease subtyping and discusses collecting genome data, precision medicine modality space (PMMS), genotypes and phenotypes, and the history of genetics and genome sequencing. He also discusses the Framingham study. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 20: Precision Medicine slides (PDF - 1.6MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/kZrb6ZIwJqg/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-21-automating-clinical-work-flows" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 21: Automating Clinical Work Flows" description="This video begins with the 2020 version of the lecture delivered via Zoom, due to technical difficulties in the original lecture 21 video. Prof. Szolovits discusses ways of improving medical care and narrowing performance distribution through decision support from local data and change-point detection to monitor rule firings. The Clinical Pathways COWpath study is used as an example. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 21: Automating Clinical Workflows slides (PDF - 1.6MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Td01vFP3uJo/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-22-regulation-of-machine-learning-artificial-intelligence-in-the-us" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 22: Regulation of Machine Learning / Artificial Intelligence in the US" description="Andy Coravos gives an overview of US regulatory agencies and their role in overseeing devices (SaMDs) and how to submit public comment to these agencies. Mark Shervy gives an overview of institutional review boards (IRBs) for research with human subjects. Speakers: Andy Coravos, Mark Shervey Lecture 22.1: Regulation of ML/AI in the US slides (PDF - 2.9MB) Lecture 22.2: Human Subjects Research slides (PDF)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/k95abdkdCPk/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-23-fairness" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 23: Fairness" description="In this lecture, Prof. Szolovits talks about algorithmic fairness and fairness in the way we build machine learning models. He raises the question What do we mean by fairness in society? and discusses how that affects prediction models. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 23: Fairness slides (PDF - 1.5MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/zYgkr0KfWM0/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-24-robustness-to-dataset-shift" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 24: Robustness to Dataset Shift" description="This lecture is primarily a discussion on things that can go wrong when deploying a machine learning model, even one that may have trained and tested well prior to deployment. Speaker: David Sontag Lecture 24: Robustness to Dataset Shift slides (PDF - 2.2MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/VpfAWhLBjQY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/lecture-videos/lecture-25-interpretability" section="Lecture Videos" title="Lecture 25: Interpretability" description="Prof. Szolovits discusses interpretability because modern machine learning models are very difficult to understand. He discusses different methods that have been used to attempt to overcome inscrutable models. Speaker: Peter Szolovits Lecture 25: Interpretability slides (PDF - 3.2MB)" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/wDLzLN1tArA/default.jpg" >}}